---
title: The Fluent API ValueGeneratedOnAdd Method
description:The `ValueGeneratedOnAdd` method indicates that the value for the selected property is generated by the database whenever a new entity is added to the database.
canonical: /configuration/fluent-api/valuegeneratedonadd-method
status: Published
lastmod: 2025-07-11
---

# EF Core ValueGeneratedOnAdd

The Entity Framework Core Fluent API `ValueGeneratedOnAdd` method indicates that the value for the selected property is generated by the database whenever a new entity is added to the database. Therefore, the property should be ignored by EF Core when constructing an `INSERT` statement. 

In the following example, the DateCreated property has been configured to map to a column that has a default value set. Therefore EF Core should not attempt to insert a default value for the property:

```csharp
public class SampleContext : DbContext
{
    public DbSet<Contact> Contacts { get; set; }
    
    protected override void OnModelCreating(ModelBuilder modelBuilder)
    {
        modelBuilder.Entity<Contact>()
            .Property(p => p.DateCreated)
            .ValueGeneratedOnAdd();
    } 

    public class Contact
    {
        public int Id { get; set; }
        public string FullName { get; set; }
        public string Email { get; set; } 
        public DateTime DateCreated { get; set; }
    }
}
``` 
If a value is applied to a property that has the `ValueGeneratedOnAdd` method applied while the entity is being tracked by the context, and the value provided differs from the CLR default value for the property type, EF Core will attempt to insert that value.

Entity Framework Core does not implement a value generation strategy for properties that have the `ValueGeneratedOnAdd` method applied. Database providers differ in the way that values are automatically generated. Some will generate values for selected data types such as `Identity`, `rowversion`, `GUID`. Others may require manual configuration such as setting default values or triggers. 


### Data Annotations

The Data Annotations attribute equivalent of the `ValueGeneratedOnAdd` method is the [`DatabaseGenerated` attribute](/configuration/data-annotation-attributes/databasegenerated-attribute) with the `Identity` option.

### Previous Versions
In previous versions of Entity Framework, you would use the `HasDatabaseGenerated` method with the `DatabaseGenerated.Identity` enumeration to achieve the same outcome as the Entity Framework core `ValueGeneratedOnAdd` method.
