---
title: The DatabaseGenerated Attribute
description: Usage of the DatabaseGenerated Attribute in Entity Framework Core
canonical: /configuration/data-annotation-attributes/databasegenerated-attribute
status: Published
lastmod: 2023-02-28
---

# EF Core DatabaseGenerated Attribute

The `DatabaseGenerated` attribute specifies how values are generated for a property by the database. The attribute takes a `DatabaseGeneratedOption` enumeration value, which can be one of three values:

1. `Computed`
2. `Identity`
3. `None`

Values can be generated by the database when data is added to the database, or when it is added _or_ updated (saved). 
#### Computed
The `Computed` option specifies that the property's value will be generated _by the database_ when the value is first saved, and subsequently regenerated every time the value is updated. The practical effect of this is that Entity Framework will not include the property in INSERT or UPDATE statements, but will obtain the computed value from the database on retrieval. 

Entity Framework Core will not implement a value generation strategy. Database providers differ in the way that values are automatically generated. Some will generate values for selected data types such as `Identity`, `rowversion`, `GUID`. Others may require manual configuration such as setting default values or triggers, or configuring the column as Computed. 

```csharp
public class Contact
{
    public int Id { get; set; }
    public string FullName { get; set; }
    public string Email { get; set; } 
    [DatabaseGenerated(DatabaseGeneratedOption.Computed)]
    public DateTime LastAccessed { get; set; }
}
```
#### Identity
The `Identity` option specifies that the value will only be generated by the database when a value is first added to the database. Thereafter, the property will not be included in UPDATE statements by Entity Framework. 

Again, Entity Framework Core will not implement a value generation strategy. Database providers differ in the way that values are automatically generated. Some will generate values for selected data types such as `Identity`, `rowversion`, `GUID`. 

In the following example, the annotation is used to configure the `Created` property in the `Contact` entity. Since the property is required, Entity Framework will configure a default value of `DateTime.MinValue`. You can override this by setting a default value in the entity's constructor or by initializing an auto-implemented property (as illustrated here):
```csharp
public class Contact
{
    public int Id { get; set; }
    public string FullName { get; set; }
    public string Email { get; set; } 
    [DatabaseGenerated(DatabaseGeneratedOption.Identity)]
    public DateTime Created { get; set; } = DateTime.UtcNow;
}
```
Alternatively, you can configure a default value in the database itself.

#### None
The `None` option prevents values from being generated by the database automatically in cases where they would otherwise be created. Convention specifies that a property named 'Id' with a data type of `int` will be configured as the primary key for an entity, and will be mapped to an `Identity` column in SQL Server, which automatically generates values when data is added. If you want to implement your own value generation strategy and override the default behaviour, you will use the `None` option:

```csharp
public class Car
{
    [DatabaseGenerated(DatabaseGeneratedOption.None)]
    public int Id { get; set; }
    public string Model { get; set; }
    public DateTime Registered { get; set; }
}
```


#### Fluent API

The Fluent API equivalent mehtods  for the `DatabaseGenerated` attribute are 

- `Computed`: [ValueGeneratedOnAddOrUpdate](/configuration/fluent-api/valuegeneratedonaddorupdate-method) 
- `Identity`: [ValueGeneratedOnAdd](/configuration/fluent-api/valuegeneratedonadd-method)
- `None`: [ValueGeneratedNever](/configuration/fluent-api/valuegeneratednever-method)
